I was 13 and a half when I arrived in Auschwitz.
I was 14. Two weeks after my 13th birthday.
There was an announcement that we should go
to the train that was on the tracks. They
were rushing us, screaming, yelling go fast,
fast, hurry. My favorite teacher was shot on
the step because she absolutely refused to
get on to the train. We tried very hard to
stay together as a family and hold on to
each other. We did not have place to sit,
we were standing all along. On the second or third
day when people started dying in the car, that
was a relief. Dead bodies could be stacked like
cordwood and that created a little more space.
The doors opened and they started yelling,
get out, get out. There was the smell,
this incredible, inhuman, otherworldly stench.
There was bedlam, because they were immediately
beginning to separate families. Two SS officers
were directing people right or left. We children
held each other's hands, we held our parents'
hands. I mean we're just literally torn apart
in a matter of minutes. I was separated from
my mother. I remember my dad going up that way,
I remember staying with my sister. I
had a younger sister, holding her hand,
stick came down between us and she was sent off. I
lost her, I lost my little sister somehow. Before
we were taken to barracks we were processed.
Undressed, the hair cut, body hair cut. We
came out looking identical. Sisters, mothers
wouldn't identify each other. We were no longer
people. You were thrown some ragged, used, filthy
striped uniforms. You were tossed some shoes with
wooden soles. Then you get into the barracks and
then life starts. And life was learning to die.
When we entered the barrack, minutes after we got
in, a young woman was running towards my sister.
She told us right away: I want you to know that
your mother and your siblings are already dead.
And that was also a shock, but an unbelievable
one. I remember rejecting it completely. I just
felt terrified the whole time I was there, so
scared because they were looking at us like we
were subhumans, they treated us like subhumans.
They had all the power and we were nothing,
we were just… That was the intent. Yes. One after
the other my classmates were dying of hunger,
exhaustion, and just total mental and
physical collapse. I was the last one.
We were next to a gas chamber and crematorium
with just an electrified fence. We saw the huge
numbers of people walking from the train
past our barrack into the gas chamber.
And often they talked to us. They’d call out:
where are you from, and what's your name,
and do you know so and so. Minutes later
the chimneys were belching fire so hard
that it was like a roaring sound. It
was just unbelievable. It wasn't smoke,
it was flames like you know, like a wind, and we
had just seen them. We had just talked to them.
Little children carried by their mothers, pregnant
women, and we can't tell them that they have a few
minutes to live. My memory of Auschwitz is the
actual extermination, and anything else that
was good or bad cannot be compared. It was a
universe of its own, it was below the human
understanding, tolerance, ability to absorb.
It's constantly with me. I just can't believe
it that people can deny something that
was so right there in front of their eyes.
My story, coming from my mouth, cannot be denied.